README.md, before:

# Diabetes Readmission Prediction

# Abstract
A diabetic clinical dataset is used to identify the patients who are in risk for readmission to the hospital by using predictive models.  A supervised learning approach for 3-class classification problem will be applied to identify the patients of target classes are the patients readmitted before 30 days (Class 0) , after 30 days (Class 1) or did not admit at all (Class 2) after discharge from hospital. The Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree (DT) and Random Forest (RF) algorithms will be used to fit the relationship. We will also evaluate the performance among the algorithms to pick best one. Python, scikit-learn machine learning library, pandas dataframe will be utilized to build the models.

# Introduction
When a patient is admitted again into a hospital within a certain interval of time after discharge from hospital is called hospital readmission. It is very important as hospital readmission rate can be a major indicator of patient’s health and life, hospital quality and cost of treatment. For example, if a patient was never been re-admitted, it’s a very good sign. Whereas if the patient is re-admitted within the 30 days of discharge represents a possibility of inappropriate treatment. On the other hand, getting readmitted after 30 days can indicate both the quality of treatment given and/or the state of the patient. 

The complex relationship between readmission and potential risk factors makes readmission prediction a difficult task. However, it is very important to know which patients are more vulnerable for readmissions, because it helps to reduce of admission rate. It has been argued that up to two-thirds of the readmissions are preventable; therefore, advances in patient readmission prediction are worth the investment [3, 4]. Readmission prediction has been tackled with diverse statistical approaches [5, 6] such as logistic regression [7, 8] and survival analysis [9].   

Each day, hospital produce enormous amount of data around the world and now a day data science has ability to deal with these massive data set due to improvement of computing power and technology which facilitated to apply different prediction models to get results rapidly and efficiently. Recently, huge attention has been given to reduce hospital readmission rate using predictive machine learning approaches, such as a binary classification problem [8, 10], support vector machines (SVM) [4, 11, 12], deep learning [13, 14], artificial neural network [7], and Naïve Bayes [5, 15].  

Despite this long history of studies about hospital readmission for adult patients such as for stoke [7], emergency patients [8, 9, 10], heart failure [5, 11], pediatric patients [2, 15]. There are a few studies devoted to readmission of diabetic patients [1, 12, 16], although diabetics patients have more tendency to readmit in the hospital which is around 9.3% of the total patients in US and 28% of which are undiagnosed [17, 18]. A very small amount of data has been used in [12, 16] for analysis, where as the importance of a specific feature (HbA1c) has been discussed in [1]. 

In this project, we will use 10 years diabetic data sets to model the patients who are most likely to readmit to hospital. Our tools will facilitate the identification of patients potentially at high risk to reduce readmission rate so that resources can be used more efficiently in terms of cost-benefit.

Details of data set and methods have been described in the material and methods section. In the Result and discussion, we explain performance of each model for both balance and imbalance data set. After that a short conclusion and future work will be presented. Last section will be references. 

# Materials and Methods
## Data Description
A 10 years of clinical care diabetic dataset, over the period between 1999 to 2008 throughout 130 USA hospitals, has been used in this project. It was collected by the Health Facts database (CERNER Corporation, Kansas City, MO). As the actual data is gathered by integrated delivery network health systems, so it includes all patient’s information. So, for specific interest it was required to extract new dataset from the database following some specific criteria. It will not be done in this project as our data source already done it. 

There are 101766 encounters with total feature 50 containing both numerical and categorical in types.  We have three target class: the patients readmitted before 30 days (Class 0), after 30 days (Class 1) or did not admit at all (Class 2) after discharge from hospital. 

Details of dataset can be found in [1] and available in online https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/781670/ (as a Supplementary Material) and UCI Machine Learning Repository  (https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Diabetes+130-US+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008). 

## Data Preprocessing
The database contains missing value, irrelevant and noisy information which is normal in any real-world data, therefore all the features and encounters will be used to make model. 

The identifier feathers such as encounter_id and patient_nbr will be avoided. We have put a 30% threshold of missing value, so any features having more than 30% missing values will not be escaped from feature list. Features having more than 30% missing values have been filled with 0.  The features weight (97%), payer code (40%), and medical specialty (47%) were removed since it had a high percentage of missing values.  Some features (examide, citoglipton and glimepiride-pioglitazone) have only one value, as constant value does not contribute to predict anything, so we avoided those features also. 

In our dataset some patients were transferred to another unit or department in same hospital and so they were encountered several times although their patient_nbr remain same.  Thus, multiple inpatient visitors from our dataset will not be considered to follow statistically independence of the data. Therefore, only first encounter per patient will be kept. Additionally, we have removed all encounters are either expired or discharge to a hospice to avoid biasing our analysis.  
Finally, we will have 69973 encounters with 42 features. 

As we already mentioned that we have some features having values in text, so we have encoded those categorical data to numerical data. We have also found that frequency of the values some features are just 1 or small and we used binning to reduce those noise from features.  Our data has been scaled by standardization scaling. As the dataset is imbalanced, thus oversampling technique has been applied to make data balanced. 

## Technologies and algorithms
The language for this project would be Python and the most widely used, flexible and user-friendly scikit-learn machine learning library and pandas dataframe will be utilized to build the models. The Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree (DT) and Random Forest (RF) algorithms will be used for prediction. We used the Scikit learn library and not the spark framework because we did not require a lot of computation power as our dataset size could fit in the memory. We chose Logistic Regression and Random Forest because the other classification techniques such as K-nearest neighbours, Stochastic gradient descent and Naive Bayes were not as efficient in terms of model performance in our application.

# Results and Discussion
Dataset have been split in to 70% to train the models and 30% to evaluate model performance.  The results from both balanced and imbalanced datasets will be present and explained. The hyperparameters of models have been calculated using k-fold cross validation process, where k is selected as 5. Same parameters for individual model are used for both cases. 

To measure model performance, we apply 6 types of metrics: best_cv_score, mean_cv_score, accuracy_score, recall_score, precision_score and f1_score.  We have also used Confusion Matrix (CM) to analysis class wise accuracy.  Finally, we have brief explanation of feature importance of the models. 

## Imbalanced Data
![cv_scor](/Figure/cv_score.png) 
Table 1 shows the accuracy from k-fold cross validation of the models. First and second rows are the score form the best parameters and mean accuracy among 5 folds respectively. For both DT and RDF, k-fold suggested ‘max_depth = 10’.

![imb_ac_10](/Figure/imb_accuracy_10.png)
Table 2 represents training and test accuracy of the models. It seems that all the models have an average performance and no significant difference are observed among the models. 

![cm_lg](/Figure/imb_con_mat_lr.png)
![cm_dt_10](/Figure/imb_con_mat_dt_10.png)
![cm_rdf_10](/Figure/imb_con_mat_rdf_10.png#center)

These three figures represent confusion matrix of imbalanced results when ‘max_depth’ depth is 10.  We observe that all the model performs poorly for Class 0, even in RDF there is no prediction for Class 0.

![imb_ac_30](/Figure/imb_accuracy_30.png)
![cm_dt_30](/Figure/imb_con_mat_dt_30.png)
![cm_rdf_30](/Figure/imb_con_mat_rdf_30.png#center)

## Balanced Data
![bl_ac](/Figure/bl_accuracy.png)

![cm_lg](/Figure/bl_con_mat_lr.png)
![cm_dt](/Figure/bl_con_mat_dt_30.png)
![cm_rdf](/Figure/bl_con_mat_rdf_30.png)


<!---
## Feature Importance
![](/Figure/Feature_Importance_Logistic.PNG)
![](/Figure/Feature_Importance_Forest.PNG)
--->
# Conclusion
For future works, in case our dataset size grows and doesn’t fit in the memory, and includes other patient history as well, we can use Apache spark for better computation power and faster processing. We can even try to use Neural networks to further improve the model performance.

# References

[1] https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/781670/  <br />
[2] https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2019/8532892/ <br />
[3]https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0041url_ver=Z39.882003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%3Dpubmed& <br />
[4] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046415000969 <br />
[5] https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/1104511 <br />
[6] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0169260717313998?via%3Dihub <br />
[7] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S089543560100395X <br />
[8] https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01969722.2016.1276772 <br />
[9] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0925231219304564 <br />
[10] https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00521-017-3242-y <br />
[11] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0957417415003085 <br />
[12] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0169260718308083 <br />
[13] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0010482518302567 <br />
[14] https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0195024 <br />
[15] https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-21009-4_51 <br />
[16] http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.259.3757&rep=rep1&type=pdf <br />
[17] https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics/statistics-report.htmlCDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fdiabetes%2Fdata%2Fstatistics%2F2014statisticsreport.html <br />
[18] https://clindiabetesendo.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40842-016-0040-x

Commit message:

add description for imb data

README.md, after:

# Diabetes Readmission Prediction

# Abstract
A diabetic clinical dataset is used to identify the patients who are in risk for readmission to the hospital by using predictive models.  A supervised learning approach for 3-class classification problem will be applied to identify the patients of target classes are the patients readmitted before 30 days (Class 0) , after 30 days (Class 1) or did not admit at all (Class 2) after discharge from hospital. The Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree (DT) and Random Forest (RF) algorithms will be used to fit the relationship. We will also evaluate the performance among the algorithms to pick best one. Python, scikit-learn machine learning library, pandas dataframe will be utilized to build the models.

# Introduction
When a patient is admitted again into a hospital within a certain interval of time after discharge from hospital is called hospital readmission. It is very important as hospital readmission rate can be a major indicator of patient’s health and life, hospital quality and cost of treatment. For example, if a patient was never been re-admitted, it’s a very good sign. Whereas if the patient is re-admitted within the 30 days of discharge represents a possibility of inappropriate treatment. On the other hand, getting readmitted after 30 days can indicate both the quality of treatment given and/or the state of the patient. 

The complex relationship between readmission and potential risk factors makes readmission prediction a difficult task. However, it is very important to know which patients are more vulnerable for readmissions, because it helps to reduce of admission rate. It has been argued that up to two-thirds of the readmissions are preventable; therefore, advances in patient readmission prediction are worth the investment [3, 4]. Readmission prediction has been tackled with diverse statistical approaches [5, 6] such as logistic regression [7, 8] and survival analysis [9].   

Each day, hospital produce enormous amount of data around the world and now a day data science has ability to deal with these massive data set due to improvement of computing power and technology which facilitated to apply different prediction models to get results rapidly and efficiently. Recently, huge attention has been given to reduce hospital readmission rate using predictive machine learning approaches, such as a binary classification problem [8, 10], support vector machines (SVM) [4, 11, 12], deep learning [13, 14], artificial neural network [7], and Naïve Bayes [5, 15].  

Despite this long history of studies about hospital readmission for adult patients such as for stoke [7], emergency patients [8, 9, 10], heart failure [5, 11], pediatric patients [2, 15]. There are a few studies devoted to readmission of diabetic patients [1, 12, 16], although diabetics patients have more tendency to readmit in the hospital which is around 9.3% of the total patients in US and 28% of which are undiagnosed [17, 18]. A very small amount of data has been used in [12, 16] for analysis, where as the importance of a specific feature (HbA1c) has been discussed in [1]. 

In this project, we will use 10 years diabetic data sets to model the patients who are most likely to readmit to hospital. Our tools will facilitate the identification of patients potentially at high risk to reduce readmission rate so that resources can be used more efficiently in terms of cost-benefit.

Details of data set and methods have been described in the material and methods section. In the Result and discussion, we explain performance of each model for both balance and imbalance data set. After that a short conclusion and future work will be presented. Last section will be references. 

# Materials and Methods
## Data Description
A 10 years of clinical care diabetic dataset, over the period between 1999 to 2008 throughout 130 USA hospitals, has been used in this project. It was collected by the Health Facts database (CERNER Corporation, Kansas City, MO). As the actual data is gathered by integrated delivery network health systems, so it includes all patient’s information. So, for specific interest it was required to extract new dataset from the database following some specific criteria. It will not be done in this project as our data source already done it. 

There are 101766 encounters with total feature 50 containing both numerical and categorical in types.  We have three target class: the patients readmitted before 30 days (Class 0), after 30 days (Class 1) or did not admit at all (Class 2) after discharge from hospital. 

Details of dataset can be found in [1] and available in online https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/781670/ (as a Supplementary Material) and UCI Machine Learning Repository  (https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Diabetes+130-US+hospitals+for+years+1999-2008). 

## Data Preprocessing
The database contains missing value, irrelevant and noisy information which is normal in any real-world data, therefore all the features and encounters will be used to make model. 

The identifier feathers such as encounter_id and patient_nbr will be avoided. We have put a 30% threshold of missing value, so any features having more than 30% missing values will not be escaped from feature list. Features having more than 30% missing values have been filled with 0.  The features weight (97%), payer code (40%), and medical specialty (47%) were removed since it had a high percentage of missing values.  Some features (examide, citoglipton and glimepiride-pioglitazone) have only one value, as constant value does not contribute to predict anything, so we avoided those features also. 

In our dataset some patients were transferred to another unit or department in same hospital and so they were encountered several times although their patient_nbr remain same.  Thus, multiple inpatient visitors from our dataset will not be considered to follow statistically independence of the data. Therefore, only first encounter per patient will be kept. Additionally, we have removed all encounters are either expired or discharge to a hospice to avoid biasing our analysis.  
Finally, we will have 69973 encounters with 42 features. 

As we already mentioned that we have some features having values in text, so we have encoded those categorical data to numerical data. We have also found that frequency of the values some features are just 1 or small and we used binning to reduce those noise from features.  Our data has been scaled by standardization scaling. As the dataset is imbalanced, thus oversampling technique has been applied to make data balanced. 

## Technologies and algorithms
The language for this project would be Python and the most widely used, flexible and user-friendly scikit-learn machine learning library and pandas dataframe will be utilized to build the models. The Logistic Regression (LR), Decision Tree (DT) and Random Forest (RF) algorithms will be used for prediction. We used the Scikit learn library and not the spark framework because we did not require a lot of computation power as our dataset size could fit in the memory. We chose Logistic Regression and Random Forest because the other classification techniques such as K-nearest neighbours, Stochastic gradient descent and Naive Bayes were not as efficient in terms of model performance in our application.

# Results and Discussion
Dataset have been split in to 70% to train the models and 30% to evaluate model performance.  The results from both balanced and imbalanced datasets will be present and explained. The hyperparameters of models have been calculated using k-fold cross validation process, where k is selected as 5. Same parameters for individual model are used for both cases. 

To measure model performance, we apply 6 types of metrics: best_cv_score, mean_cv_score, accuracy_score, recall_score, precision_score and f1_score.  We have also used Confusion Matrix (CM) to analysis class wise accuracy.  Finally, we have brief explanation of feature importance of the models. 

## Imbalanced Data
![cv_scor](/Figure/cv_score.png) 
Table 1 shows the accuracy from k-fold cross validation of the models. First and second rows are the score form the best parameters and mean accuracy among 5 folds respectively. For both DT and RDF, k-fold suggested ‘max_depth = 10’.

![imb_ac_10](/Figure/imb_accuracy_10.png)
Table 2 represents training and test accuracy of the models. It seems that all the models have an average performance and no significant difference are observed among the models. 

![cm_lg](/Figure/imb_con_mat_lr.png)
![cm_dt_10](/Figure/imb_con_mat_dt_10.png)
![cm_rdf_10](/Figure/imb_con_mat_rdf_10.png#center)

These three figures represent confusion matrix of test dataset when ‘max_depth’ depth is 10.  We observe that all the model performs poorly for Class 0, even in RDF there is no prediction for Class 0.  We also see a slightly better prediction for Class 1 compare to Class 0, which tells us that the overall accuracy mostly depends on Class 2, so it is clearly due to imbalanced dataset because the results are biased on Class 2. In our datasets, the ratio between Class 0: Class 1: Class 2 is 1: 3.4:6.6.  Data resample may apply to improve the performance as both DT and RDF support data resampling. Before making data resampling, we have made a try first to change max_depth from 10 to 30 for DT and RDF to see if it can help to improve our model accuracy.

![cm_dt_30](/Figure/imb_con_mat_dt_30.png)
![cm_rdf_30](/Figure/imb_con_mat_rdf_30.png#center)

These are figures are showing confusion matrix for DT and RDF with ‘max_depth = 30’. It seems  increasing max_depth did not help at too much. 

![imb_ac_30](/Figure/imb_accuracy_30.png)
However, this accuracy Table gives interesting information training accuracy are really promising which are above 90% in both DT and RDF, on the other hand test performance is still disappointing. 

## Balanced Data
![bl_ac](/Figure/bl_accuracy.png)

![cm_lg](/Figure/bl_con_mat_lr.png)
![cm_dt](/Figure/bl_con_mat_dt_30.png)
![cm_rdf](/Figure/bl_con_mat_rdf_30.png)


<!---
## Feature Importance
![](/Figure/Feature_Importance_Logistic.PNG)
![](/Figure/Feature_Importance_Forest.PNG)
--->
# Conclusion
For future works, in case our dataset size grows and doesn’t fit in the memory, and includes other patient history as well, we can use Apache spark for better computation power and faster processing. We can even try to use Neural networks to further improve the model performance.

# References

[1] https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/781670/  <br />
[2] https://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2019/8532892/ <br />
[3]https://www.healthaffairs.org/doi/full/10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0041url_ver=Z39.882003&rfr_id=ori%3Arid%3Acrossref.org&rfr_dat=cr_pub%3Dpubmed& <br />
[4] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1532046415000969 <br />
[5] https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/1104511 <br />
[6] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0169260717313998?via%3Dihub <br />
[7] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S089543560100395X <br />
[8] https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/01969722.2016.1276772 <br />
[9] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0925231219304564 <br />
[10] https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00521-017-3242-y <br />
[11] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0957417415003085 <br />
[12] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0169260718308083 <br />
[13] https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0010482518302567 <br />
[14] https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0195024 <br />
[15] https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-319-21009-4_51 <br />
[16] http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.259.3757&rep=rep1&type=pdf <br />
[17] https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/data/statistics/statistics-report.htmlCDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fdiabetes%2Fdata%2Fstatistics%2F2014statisticsreport.html <br />
[18] https://clindiabetesendo.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s40842-016-0040-x
